---
title: 'Proofreading Oral Histories for the Austin History Center'
description: 'A blog about my volunteering adventures for the Austin History Center'
pubDate: 'Jan 21 2025'
heroImage: '/blog-placeholder-3.jpg'
---

If you don’t know this about me, I love history, the library, and I love Austin. Ever since I was young, I hungrily chased after facts, desperate to learn how the world worked and about all the amazing events, people, and movements that came before me. For example, one of my first historical fascinations was Nellie Bly and how she broke gender barriers and social norms to be an investigative journalist in the late 1800s and early 1900s. I was in awe of her tenacity and wanted to be like her. After Nellie Bly, I quickly learned I could find out how the library held many such stories–you only had to go in search of them. It was through my love for history I found my love of reading and writing, and it was through my desire to pursue an English Lit degree at the University of Texas that brought me to Austin. So, you could kind of blame my love of history on how I ended up in Austin… in a “one thing after another” sort of way.

You can imagine my excitement when I saw the Austin Public Library was seeking volunteer proofreaders for the [Austin History Center’s oral histories project](https://www.austinchronicle.com/music/2023-09-15/austins-hip-hop-pioneers-in-their-own-words/). It felt like a beautiful confluence of things that make me happy. I applied immediately.

I was luckily one of two chosen to support the project. Ryan, an archivist for the [Austin History Center](https://library.austintexas.gov/ahc), shared background with us on what we would be proofreading: transcripts from conversations he had with some of Austin’s hip-hop scene in the 1980s and 1990s. He wanted to ensure these artists’ stories were recorded, saved, and protected from being forgotten. It was a project meant to honor Austin’s music roots as well as preserve these stories for future generations of Austinites and hip-hop fans alike. Many of the folks he interviewed were Black and Brown people who grew up on Austin’s East Side. Now that East Austin is gentrified and has greatly changed, it makes preserving these oral histories that much more important.

I recently finished my first assignment for the project. It focused on the Cooly Girls, a hip-hop and rap girl group. Ryan interviewed [two of the Cooly Girls](https://ahc.access.lyrasistechnology.org/repositories/2/archival_objects/144197)--Erika Sodie who was one of the founding members and Juanita Marshall Esperanza, who came in a little later as their songstress. To this day, they are still local royalty. Getting to hear their story, in their own words, was an amazing experience. It took many hours to proofread the transcript and listen to them share their tale, so I got familiar with each member’s cadence and voice. This was an interesting revelation to me as I proofread: The longer I edited, the better my changes and accuracy became because I got to know their voices, cadences, and personalities. What once sounded unintelligible because of crosstalk and laughter became clear and unique by the end of my review.

All in all, I spent about 11 hours proofreading the Cooly Girls transcript. While I will likely never meet these trailblazers–who played at the first ever SXSW and opened for Flavor Flav, MC Hammer, and so many more whenever they came to town–I have a deep respect for them. They were part of the first groups and artists to bring rap and hip-hop to Austin, when the music had mostly been bicoastal by the mid-80s.

If you are interested in learning more about the Cooly Girls, their oral history transcript is expected to go live on the Austin History Center’s website (and in its archives) in February of this year. I’m really proud of the tiny contribution I could make to preserving their history and making it accessible to all Austinites moving forward.

I am expecting to receive my next assignment for the hip-hop oral histories project later this week!